Announce v1.29 release (#43939)
kubernetes/website: content/en/blog/_posts/2023-12-05-kubernetes-1.29.md

Reviewer: We usually don't highlight contributor-level details like SIGs; they're not a secret, but we also don't make these details into headings. For end users, the feature is the important thing not how we organized all the hard work to deliver it.

I strongly recommend organizing the announcements in _stability_ order: graduations, then beta features, then alphas. We've previously covered that under a heading of _Major changes_ and, whilst it's up to SIG Release to call it on this one, I think that matches what the readers will want to see us explain.

---
layout: blog
title: 'Kubernetes 1.29: TBD'
date: 2023-12-05
slug: kubernetes-1-29-release-announcement
---

**Authors:** [Kubernetes 1.29 Release Team](https://github.com/kubernetes/sig-release/blob/master/releases/release-1.29/release_team.md)

Announcing the release of Kubernetes v1.29 "TBD", the last release of 2023!

Similar to previous releases, the upcoming release of 1.29 will bring about main features, deprecations and removals. The consistent delivery of top-notch releases underscores the strength of our development cycle and the vibrant support from our community. Key modifications are anticipated in areas such as sig-storage, sig-scheduling, sig-windows, sig-network, and various other sigs.

This release consists of <xx> enhancements. Of those enhancements, <xx> are entering Alpha, <xx> have graduated to Beta, and <xxx> have graduated to Stable.

## Release Theme And Logo
    
Kubernetes v1.29: xxxxxx

The theme for Kubernetes v1.29 is xxxx.

> ## What's New in [sig-storage](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/tree/master/sig-storage) 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> ### Generally Available: ReadWriteOncePod PersistentVolume AccessMode

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Generally Available: ReadWriteOncePod PersistentVolume access mode
```

> In Kubernetes, [access modes](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/storage/persistent-volumes/#access-modes) are the way you can define how durable storage is consumed. These access modes are a part of the spec for PersistentVolumes (PVs) and PersistentVolumeClaims (PVCs).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Kubernetes, volume [access modes](/docs/concepts/storage/persistent-volumes/#access-modes)
are the way you can define how durable storage is consumed. These access modes are a part of the spec for PersistentVolumes (PVs) and PersistentVolumeClaims (PVCs).
```

Before v1.22, Kubernetes offered three access modes for PVs and PVCs:
	•	ReadWriteOnce – the volume can be mounted as read-write by a single node
	•	ReadOnlyMany – the volume can be mounted read-only by many nodes

> 	•	ReadWriteMany – the volume can be mounted as read-write by many nodes

Reviewer: (please use Markdown here)

The ReadWriteOnce access mode restricts volume access to a single node, which means it is possible for multiple pods on the same node to read from and write to the same volume. This could potentially be a major problem for some applications, especially if they require at most one writer for data safety guarantees.
    
To address this problem, a fourth access mode ReadWriteOncePod was introduced as an Alpha feature in v1.22 for CSI volumes. If you create a pod with a PVC that uses the ReadWriteOncePod access mode, Kubernetes ensures that pod is the only pod across your whole cluster that can read that PVC or write to it. In v1.29, this feature became Generally Available.

> ### Generally Available: Node Expand Secret for CSI Driver

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Generally Available: Node volume expansion Secret support for CSI drivers
```

    
In Kubernetes, a volume expansion operation may include the expansion of the volume on the node side which involves filesystem resize. Some CSI drivers require secrets (for example: a credential for accessing a SAN fabric) during the node expansion for the following use cases:
	•	When a PersistentVolume represents encrypted block storage (for example using LUKS) you need to provide a passphrase in order to expand the device.
	•	For various validations at time of node expansion, the CSI driver needs to have credentials in order to communicate with the backend storage system. 

To meet this requirement, a CSI Node Expand Secret feature was introduced in Kubernetes v1.25 release. This allows an optional secret field to be sent as part of the NodeExpandVolumeRequest by the CSI drivers so that node side volume expansion operation can be performed with the underlying storage system. In Kubernetes 1.29 release, this feature became generally available.

## What's New in [sig-scheduling](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/tree/master/sig-scheduling)

> ### Beta: Per-plugin callback functions for accurate requeueing in kube-schedule

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Beta: Per-plugin callback functions in kube-scheduler for accurate requeueing
```

The throughput of the scheduler is our eternal challenge. This QueueingHint feature brings a new possibility to optimize the efficiency of requeueing, which could reduce useless scheduling retries significantly.
    

> ### Alpha: Introduce MatchLabelKeys to Pod Affinity and Pod Anti Affinity - alpha in v1.29

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Alpha: Define Pod affinity or anti-affinity using `matchLabelKeys`
```

The throughput of the scheduler is our eternal challenge. This QueueingHint feature brings a new possibility to optimize the efficiency of requeueing, which could reduce useless scheduling retries significantly. We're actively working on this, and some stable in-tree plugins will have supported it in v1.29.
    

> ### Generally Available: ReadWriteOncePod access mode for PV

Reviewer: This is already covered.

> ### Beta: Decouple TaintManager from NodeLifecycleController

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Beta: Node lifecycle separated from taint management
```

If this ends up under a **Major changes** heading, I'd skip it - it's a nice improvement but to end users it may not seem major.

As title describes, it's to decouple `TaintManager` that performs taint-based pod eviction from `NodeLifecycleController` and make them two separate controllers: `NodeLifecycleController` to add taints to unhealthy nodes and `TaintManager` to perform pod deletion on nodes tainted with NoExecute effect.

## What's New in [sig-network](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/tree/master/sig-network)

> ### Alpha: Add a new kube-proxy backend using nftables

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Alpha: nftables backend for kube-proxy
```

    
This features adds a new backend to kube-proxy based on nftables, since kernel community is focused mainly in nftables and practically stopped the iptables development
    

> ### Alpha: Implement an API to manage Kubernetes Services IP Ranges  (Multiple Service CIDRs)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Alpha: An API to manage IP address ranges for Services
```
using sentence case makes it more obvious that Service is a special term here

This features allow cluster administrators to dynamically resize the service IP ranges assigned to their clusters to deal with problems like IP exhaustion or IP renumbering.

## What's New in [sig-windows](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/tree/master/sig-windows)

### Alpha: Add support to containerd/kubelet/CRI to support image pull per runtime class

### Alpha: Implement In-place Update of Pod Resources

## Graduations, deprecations and removals for Kubernetes v1.29

### Graduated to stable

This release includes a total of xx enhancements promoted to Stable:
- 
- 
-
-

### Deprecations and removals

> See the official list of [API removals](/docs/reference/using-api/deprecation-guide/#v1-29) for a full list of planned deprecations for Kubernetes v1.29.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

This announcement is as official as the docs, IMO.

#### Removal of in-tree integrations with cloud providers ([KEP-2395](https://kep.k8s.io/2395))

> The [feature gates](/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/feature-gates/) `DisableCloudProviders` and `DisableKubeletCloudCredentialProviders` will both be set to `true` by default for Kubernetes v1.29. This change will require that users who are currently using in-tree cloud provider integrations (Azure, GCE, or vSphere) enable external cloud controller managers, or opt in to the legacy integration by setting the associated feature gates to `false`.
> 
> Enabling external cloud controller managers means you must run a suitable cloud controller manager within your cluster's control plane; it also requires setting the command line argument `--cloud-provider=external` for the kubelet (on every relevant node), and across the control plane (kube-apiserver and kube-controller-manager).
> 
> For more information about how to enable and run external cloud controller managers, read [Cloud Controller Manager Administration](/docs/tasks/administer-cluster/running-cloud-controller/) and [Migrate Replicated Control Plane To Use Cloud Controller Manager](/docs/tasks/administer-cluster/controller-manager-leader-migration/).
> 
> For general information about cloud controller managers, please see
> [Cloud Controller Manager](/docs/concepts/architecture/cloud-controller/) in the Kubernetes documentation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Kubernetes v1.29 defaults to operating _without_ a built-in integration to any cloud provider.
If you have previously been relying on in-tree cloud provider integrations (with Azure, GCE, or vSphere) then you can either:
- enable an equivalent external [cloud controller manager](/docs/concepts/architecture/cloud-controller/)
  integration _(recommended)_
- opt back in to the legacy integration by setting the associated feature gates to `false`; the feature
  gates to change are `DisableCloudProviders` and `DisableKubeletCloudCredentialProviders`
  
Enabling external cloud controller managers means you must run a suitable cloud controller manager within your cluster's control plane; it also requires setting the command line argument `--cloud-provider=external` for the kubelet (on every relevant node), and across the control plane (kube-apiserver and kube-controller-manager).

For more information about how to enable and run external cloud controller managers, read [Cloud Controller Manager Administration](/docs/tasks/administer-cluster/running-cloud-controller/) and [Migrate Replicated Control Plane To Use Cloud Controller Manager](/docs/tasks/administer-cluster/controller-manager-leader-migration/).
```

#### Removal of the `v1beta2` flow control API group

> The _flowcontrol.apiserver.k8s.io/v1beta2_ API version of FlowSchema and PriorityLevelConfiguration will [no longer be served](/docs/reference/using-api/deprecation-guide/#v1-29) in Kubernetes v1.29. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The deprecated _flowcontrol.apiserver.k8s.io/v1beta2_ API version of FlowSchema and
PriorityLevelConfiguration are no longer served in Kubernetes v1.29. 
```

> To prepare for this, you can edit your existing manifests and rewrite client software to use the `flowcontrol.apiserver.k8s.io/v1beta3` API version, available since v1.26. All existing persisted objects are accessible via the new API. Notable changes in `flowcontrol.apiserver.k8s.io/v1beta3` include
> that the PriorityLevelConfiguration `spec.limited.assuredConcurrencyShares` field was renamed to `spec.limited.nominalConcurrencyShares`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you have manifests or client software that uses the deprecated beta API group, you should change
these before you upgrade to v1.29.
See the [deprecated API migration guide](/docs/reference/using-api/deprecation-guide/#v1-29)
for details and advice.
```

 
#### Deprecation of the `status.nodeInfo.kubeProxyVersion` field for Node

> The `.status.kubeProxyVersion` field for Node objects will be [marked as deprecated](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/4004) in v1.29 in preparation for its removal in a future release. This field is not accurate and is set by kubelet, which does not actually know the kube-proxy version, or even if kube-proxy is running.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `.status.kubeProxyVersion` field for Node objects is now deprecated, and the Kubernetes project
is proposing to remove that field in a future release. The deprecated field is not accurate and has historically
been managed by kubelet - which does not actually know the kube-proxy version, or even whether kube-proxy
is running.

If you've been using this field in client software, stop - the information isn't reliable and the field is now
deprecated.
```

---
layout: blog
title: 'Kubernetes 1.29: TBD'
date: 2023-12-05
slug: kubernetes-1-29-release-announcement
---

**Authors:** [Kubernetes 1.29 Release Team](https://github.com/kubernetes/sig-release/blob/master/releases/release-1.29/release_team.md)

> Announcing the release of Kubernetes v1.29 "TBD", the last release of 2023!

Reviewer: In docs, we use whichever feels most appropriate for the context. For a release announcement, look at previous release announcements for a sense of what works. Try https://kubernetes.io/blog/2020/03/25/kubernetes-1-18-release-announcement/ for an example of one that seems quite polished.

> Announcing the release of Kubernetes v1.29 "TBD", the last release of 2023!

Reviewer 2: @mickeyboxell Thanks for pointing this out, I checked one of the older release blogs and updated to that convention.

> Similar to previous releases, the upcoming release of 1.29 will bring about main features, deprecations and removals. The consistent delivery of top-notch releases underscores the strength of our development cycle and the vibrant support from our community. Key modifications are anticipated in areas such as sig-storage, sig-scheduling, sig-windows, sig-network, and various other sigs.

Reviewer: Bigger problem: **it's not an upcoming release**. This article goes out moments _after_ the release.

Anyway, it should be “SIG Storage”, “SIG Scheduling”, etc.

This release consists of <xx> enhancements. Of those enhancements, <xx> are entering Alpha, <xx> have graduated to Beta, and <xxx> have graduated to Stable.

## Release Theme And Logo
    
Kubernetes v1.29: xxxxxx

The theme for Kubernetes v1.29 is xxxx.

## What's New in [sig-storage](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/tree/master/sig-storage) 

### Generally Available: ReadWriteOncePod PersistentVolume access mode

In Kubernetes, volume [access modes](/docs/concepts/storage/persistent-volumes/#access-modes)

> are the way you can define how durable storage is consumed. These access modes are a part of the spec for PersistentVolumes (PVs) and PersistentVolumeClaims (PVCs).

Author: Please @xing-yang and @humblec could you help us with the @mickeyboxell question?

> are the way you can define how durable storage is consumed. These access modes are a part of the spec for PersistentVolumes (PVs) and PersistentVolumeClaims (PVCs).

Reviewer 3: cc @chrishenzie

> are the way you can define how durable storage is consumed. These access modes are a part of the spec for PersistentVolumes (PVs) and PersistentVolumeClaims (PVCs).

Reviewer 4: We can add the following to explain how storage is consumed if it helps:
```
When using storage, there are different ways to model how that storage is consumed.

For example, a storage system like a network file share can have many users all reading and writing data simultaneously. In other cases maybe everyone is allowed to read data but not write it. For highly sensitive data, maybe only one user is allowed to read and write data but nobody else.
```

Before v1.22, Kubernetes offered three access modes for PVs and PVCs:
	•	ReadWriteOnce – the volume can be mounted as read-write by a single node
	•	ReadOnlyMany – the volume can be mounted read-only by many nodes
	•	ReadWriteMany – the volume can be mounted as read-write by many nodes

The ReadWriteOnce access mode restricts volume access to a single node, which means it is possible for multiple pods on the same node to read from and write to the same volume. This could potentially be a major problem for some applications, especially if they require at most one writer for data safety guarantees.
    
To address this problem, a fourth access mode ReadWriteOncePod was introduced as an Alpha feature in v1.22 for CSI volumes. If you create a pod with a PVC that uses the ReadWriteOncePod access mode, Kubernetes ensures that pod is the only pod across your whole cluster that can read that PVC or write to it. In v1.29, this feature became Generally Available.

### Generally Available: Node Expand Secret for CSI Driver
    

> In Kubernetes, a volume expansion operation may include the expansion of the volume on the node side which involves filesystem resize. Some CSI drivers require secrets (for example: a credential for accessing a SAN fabric) during the node expansion for the following use cases:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
In Kubernetes, a volume expansion operation may include the expansion of the volume on the node, which involves filesystem resize. Some CSI drivers require secrets, for example a credential for accessing a SAN fabric, during the node expansion for the following use cases:
```

	•	When a PersistentVolume represents encrypted block storage (for example using LUKS) you need to provide a passphrase in order to expand the device.

> 	•	For various validations at time of node expansion, the CSI driver needs to have credentials in order to communicate with the backend storage system. 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
	•	For various validations, the CSI driver needs to have credentials to communicate with the backend storage system at time of node expansion. 
```

> To meet this requirement, a CSI Node Expand Secret feature was introduced in Kubernetes v1.25 release. This allows an optional secret field to be sent as part of the NodeExpandVolumeRequest by the CSI drivers so that node side volume expansion operation can be performed with the underlying storage system. In Kubernetes 1.29 release, this feature became generally available.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
To meet this requirement, a CSI Node Expand Secret feature was introduced in Kubernetes 1.25. This allows an optional secret field to be sent as part of the NodeExpandVolumeRequest by the CSI drivers so that node volume expansion operation can be performed with the underlying storage system. In Kubernetes 1.29, this feature became generally available.
```

## What's New in [sig-scheduling](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/tree/master/sig-scheduling)

### Beta: Per-plugin callback functions for accurate requeueing in kube-schedule

The throughput of the scheduler is our eternal challenge. This QueueingHint feature brings a new possibility to optimize the efficiency of requeueing, which could reduce useless scheduling retries significantly.
    
### Alpha: Introduce MatchLabelKeys to Pod Affinity and Pod Anti Affinity - alpha in v1.29

> The throughput of the scheduler is our eternal challenge. This QueueingHint feature brings a new possibility to optimize the efficiency of requeueing, which could reduce useless scheduling retries significantly. We're actively working on this, and some stable in-tree plugins will have supported it in v1.29.

Author: ```suggestion
It will increase the accuracy of calculation during rolling updates.
```

The throughput of the scheduler is our eternal challenge. This QueueingHint feature brings a new possibility to optimize the efficiency of requeueing, which could reduce useless scheduling retries significantly.
    
### Alpha: Introduce MatchLabelKeys to Pod Affinity and Pod Anti Affinity - alpha in v1.29

The throughput of the scheduler is our eternal challenge. This QueueingHint feature brings a new possibility to optimize the efficiency of requeueing, which could reduce useless scheduling retries significantly. We're actively working on this, and some stable in-tree plugins will have supported it in v1.29.
    
### Generally Available: ReadWriteOncePod access mode for PV

### Beta: Node lifecycle separated from taint management

As title describes, it's to decouple `TaintManager` that performs taint-based pod eviction from `NodeLifecycleController` and make them two separate controllers: `NodeLifecycleController` to add taints to unhealthy nodes and `TaintManager` to perform pod deletion on nodes tainted with NoExecute effect.

## What's New in [sig-network](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/tree/master/sig-network)

### Alpha: nftables backend for kube-proxy
    

> This features adds a new backend to kube-proxy based on nftables, since kernel community is focused mainly in nftables and practically stopped the iptables development

Author: ```suggestion
The default kube-proxy implementation on Linux is currently based on iptables. IPTables was the preferred packet filtering and processing system in the Linux kernel for many years (starting with the 2.4 kernel in 2001). However, unsolable problems with iptables led to the development of a successor, nftables. Development on iptables has mostly stopped, with new features and performance improvements primarily going into nftables instead.

This feature adds a new backend to kube-proxy based on nftables, since some Linuxndistributions already started to deprecate and remove iptables, and nftables claims to solve the main performance problems of iptables.
```

As title describes, it's to decouple `TaintManager` that performs taint-based pod eviction from `NodeLifecycleController` and make them two separate controllers: `NodeLifecycleController` to add taints to unhealthy nodes and `TaintManager` to perform pod deletion on nodes tainted with NoExecute effect.

## What's New in [sig-network](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/tree/master/sig-network)

### Alpha: nftables backend for kube-proxy
    
The default kube-proxy implementation on Linux is currently based on iptables. IPTables was the preferred packet filtering and processing system in the Linux kernel for many years (starting with the 2.4 kernel in 2001). However, unsolable problems with iptables led to the development of a successor, nftables. Development on iptables has mostly stopped, with new features and performance improvements primarily going into nftables instead.

This feature adds a new backend to kube-proxy based on nftables, since some Linuxndistributions already started to deprecate and remove iptables, and nftables claims to solve the main performance problems of iptables.
    
### Alpha: An API to manage IP address ranges for Services

> This features allow cluster administrators to dynamically resize the service IP ranges assigned to their clusters to deal with problems like IP exhaustion or IP renumbering.

Author: ```suggestion
Services are an abstract way to expose an application running on a set of Pods. Services can have a cluster-scoped virtual IP address, that is allocated from a predefined CIDR defined in the kube-apiserver flags. However, users may want to add, remove or resize existing IP ranges allocated for Services without having to restart the kube-apiserver.

This feature allow cluster administrators to dynamically resize the Service IP ranges assigned to their clusters to resolve problems like IP exhaustion or IP renumbering.
```

Similar to previous releases, the upcoming release of Kubernetes 1.29 will introduce new stable, beta, and alpha features. The consistent delivery of top-notch releases underscores the strength of our development cycle and the vibrant support from our community. Key enhancements are anticipated from sig-storage, sig-scheduling, sig-windows, sig-network, and various other sigs.

This release consists of <xx> enhancements. Of those enhancements, <xx> are entering Alpha, <xx> have graduated to Beta, and <xxx> have graduated to Stable.

## Release Theme And Logo
    
Kubernetes v1.29: xxxxxx

The theme for Kubernetes v1.29 is xxxx.

## What's New in [sig-storage](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/tree/master/sig-storage) 

### Generally Available: ReadWriteOncePod PersistentVolume access mode

In Kubernetes, volume [access modes](/docs/concepts/storage/persistent-volumes/#access-modes)
are the way you can define how durable storage is consumed. These access modes are a part of the spec for PersistentVolumes (PVs) and PersistentVolumeClaims (PVCs).

Before v1.22, Kubernetes offered three access modes for PVs and PVCs:

> 	•	ReadWriteOnce – the volume can be mounted as read-write by a single node

Author: ```suggestion
*	ReadWriteOnce – the volume can be mounted as read-write by a single node
```

> 	•	ReadOnlyMany – the volume can be mounted read-only by many nodes

Author: ```suggestion
*	ReadOnlyMany – the volume can be mounted read-only by many nodes
```

> 	•	ReadWriteMany – the volume can be mounted as read-write by many nodes

Author: ```suggestion
*	ReadWriteMany – the volume can be mounted as read-write by many nodes
```

layout: blog
title: 'Kubernetes 1.29: TBD'
date: 2023-12-05
slug: kubernetes-1-29-release-announcement
---

**Authors:** [Kubernetes 1.29 Release Team](https://github.com/kubernetes/sig-release/blob/master/releases/release-1.29/release_team.md)

Announcing the release of Kubernetes 1.29 "TBD", the last release of 2023!

Similar to previous releases, the release of Kubernetes 1.29 introduces new stable, beta, and alpha features. The consistent delivery of top-notch releases underscores the strength of our development cycle and the vibrant support from our community. Key enhancements are anticipated from sig-storage, sig-scheduling, sig-windows, sig-network, and various other sigs.

This release consists of 49 enhancements. Of those enhancements, 19 are entering Alpha, 19 have graduated to Beta, and 11 have graduated to Stable.

## Release Theme And Logo
    
Kubernetes 1.29: xxxxxx

The theme for Kubernetes 1.29 is xxxx.

## What's New in [sig-storage](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/tree/master/sig-storage) 

### Generally Available: ReadWriteOncePod PersistentVolume access mode

In Kubernetes, volume [access modes](/docs/concepts/storage/persistent-volumes/#access-modes)

> are the way you can define how durable storage is consumed. These access modes are a part of the spec for PersistentVolumes (PVs) and PersistentVolumeClaims (PVCs).

Author: ```suggestion
are the way you can define how durable storage is consumed. These access modes are a part of the spec for PersistentVolumes (PVs) and PersistentVolumeClaims (PVCs). When using storage, there are different ways to model how that storage is consumed. For example, a storage system like a network file share can have many users all reading and writing data simultaneously. In other cases maybe everyone is allowed to read data but not write it. For highly sensitive data, maybe only one user is allowed to read and write data but nobody else.
```

- [Remove transient node predicates from KCCM's service controller](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/3458)
- [Reserve nodeport ranges for dynamic and static allocation](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/3668)
- [Priority and Fairness for API Server Requests](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/1040)
- [KMS v2 Improvements](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/3299)
- [Support paged LIST queries from the Kubernetes API](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/365)
- [ReadWriteOncePod PersistentVolume Access Mode](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/2485)
- [Kubernetes Component Health SLIs](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/3466)
- [CRD Validation Expression Language](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/2876)
- [Introduce nodeExpandSecret in CSI PV source](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/3107)
- [Track Ready Pods in Job status](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/2879)
- [Kubelet Resource Metrics Endpoint](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/727)

### Deprecations and removals

> #### Removal of in-tree integrations with cloud providers ([KEP-2395](https://kep.k8s.io/2395))

Reviewer 6: This is pretty big change, thanks for adding it to the deprecations/removal list. I'm wondering if there's more we can do to make this change stand out more since it's a breaking change for some clusters. Can we maybe add a "What's new in sig-cloud-provider?" section at the top that also highlights this? Thoughts @elmiko @sftim (continuing the discussion from https://github.com/kubernetes/website/pull/44010)

If you have previously been relying on in-tree cloud provider integrations (with Azure, GCE, or vSphere) then you can either:
- enable an equivalent external [cloud controller manager](/docs/concepts/architecture/cloud-controller/)
  integration _(recommended)_
- opt back in to the legacy integration by setting the associated feature gates to `false`; the feature
  gates to change are `DisableCloudProviders` and `DisableKubeletCloudCredentialProviders`
  
Enabling external cloud controller managers means you must run a suitable cloud controller manager within your cluster's control plane; it also requires setting the command line argument `--cloud-provider=external` for the kubelet (on every relevant node), and across the control plane (kube-apiserver and kube-controller-manager).

For more information about how to enable and run external cloud controller managers, read [Cloud Controller Manager Administration](/docs/tasks/administer-cluster/running-cloud-controller/) and [Migrate Replicated Control Plane To Use Cloud Controller Manager](/docs/tasks/administer-cluster/controller-manager-leader-migration/).

> 

Author: ```suggestion

> More details here in the ([KEP-2395](https://kep.k8s.io/2395))
```

---
layout: blog
title: 'Kubernetes 1.29: TBD'
date: 2023-12-05
slug: kubernetes-1-29-release-announcement
---

**Authors:** [Kubernetes 1.29 Release Team](https://github.com/kubernetes/sig-release/blob/master/releases/release-1.29/release_team.md)

**Editors:** Carol Valencia, Kristin Martin, Abigail McCarthy, James Quigley

Announcing the release of Kubernetes 1.29 "TBD", the last release of 2023!

Similar to previous releases, the release of Kubernetes 1.29 introduces new stable, beta, and alpha features. The consistent delivery of top-notch releases underscores the strength of our development cycle and the vibrant support from our community. Key enhancements are anticipated from sig-storage, sig-scheduling, sig-windows, sig-network, and various other sigs.

This release consists of 49 enhancements. Of those enhancements, 19 are entering Alpha, 19 have graduated to Beta, and 11 have graduated to Stable.

## Release Theme And Logo
    
Kubernetes 1.29: xxxxxx

The theme for Kubernetes 1.29 is xxxx.

## What's New in Generally Available 

### ReadWriteOncePod PersistentVolume access mode ([sig-storage](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/tree/master/sig-storage))

> In Kubernetes, volume [access modes](/docs/concepts/storage/persistent-volumes/#access-modes)

Reviewer: Need? No.

But localization teams will thank us if we do.

are the way you can define how durable storage is consumed. These access modes are a part of the spec for PersistentVolumes (PVs) and PersistentVolumeClaims (PVCs). When using storage, there are different ways to model how that storage is consumed. For example, a storage system like a network file share can have many users all reading and writing data simultaneously. In other cases maybe everyone is allowed to read data but not write it. For highly sensitive data, maybe only one user is allowed to read and write data but nobody else.

Before v1.22, Kubernetes offered three access modes for PVs and PVCs:
*	ReadWriteOnce – the volume can be mounted as read-write by a single node
*	ReadOnlyMany – the volume can be mounted read-only by many nodes
*	ReadWriteMany – the volume can be mounted as read-write by many nodes

The ReadWriteOnce access mode restricts volume access to a single node, which means it is possible for multiple pods on the same node to read from and write to the same volume. This could potentially be a major problem for some applications, especially if they require at most one writer for data safety guarantees.
    

> To address this problem, a fourth access mode ReadWriteOncePod was introduced as an Alpha feature in v1.22 for CSI volumes. If you create a pod with a PVC that uses the ReadWriteOncePod access mode, Kubernetes ensures that pod is the only pod across your whole cluster that can read that PVC or write to it. In v1.29, this feature became Generally Available.

Reviewer 5: Same question as above: should we use "stable" or "generally available"?

### Node volume expansion Secret support for CSI drivers ([sig-storage](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/tree/master/sig-storage))
    
In Kubernetes, a volume expansion operation may include the expansion of the volume on the node, which involves filesystem resize. Some CSI drivers require secrets, for example a credential for accessing a SAN fabric, during the node expansion for the following use cases:
	•	When a PersistentVolume represents encrypted block storage, for example using LUKS, you need to provide a passphrase in order to expand the device.
	•	For various validations, the CSI driver needs to have credentials to communicate with the backend storage system at time of node expansion. 

> To meet this requirement, a CSI Node Expand Secret feature was introduced in Kubernetes 1.25. This allows an optional secret field to be sent as part of the NodeExpandVolumeRequest by the CSI drivers so that node volume expansion operation can be performed with the underlying storage system. In Kubernetes 1.29, this feature became generally available.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
To meet this requirement, the CSI Node Expand Secret feature was introduced in Kubernetes 1.25. This allows an optional secret field to be sent as part of the NodeExpandVolumeRequest by the CSI drivers so that node volume expansion operation can be performed with the underlying storage system. In Kubernetes 1.29, this feature became generally available.
```

## What's New in Beta

### Per-plugin callback functions in kube-scheduler for accurate requeueing ([sig-scheduling](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/tree/master/sig-scheduling))

The throughput of the scheduler is our eternal challenge. This QueueingHint feature brings a new possibility to optimize the efficiency of requeueing, which could reduce useless scheduling retries significantly.

### Node lifecycle separated from taint management ([sig-scheduling](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/tree/master/sig-scheduling))

As title describes, it's to decouple `TaintManager` that performs taint-based pod eviction from `NodeLifecycleController` and make them two separate controllers: `NodeLifecycleController` to add taints to unhealthy nodes and `TaintManager` to perform pod deletion on nodes tainted with NoExecute effect.

## What's New in Alpha

### Define Pod affinity or anti-affinity using `matchLabelKeys` ([sig-scheduling](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/tree/master/sig-scheduling)) 

> The throughput of the scheduler is our eternal challenge. This QueueingHint feature brings a new possibility to optimize the efficiency of requeueing, which could reduce useless scheduling retries significantly. We're actively working on this, and some stable in-tree plugins will have supported it in v1.29.

Reviewer 5: This looks identical to the **Node lifecycle separated from taint management** feature above.

Author: Hi @sanposhiho , could you help us to create a better text about this features of sig-scheduling? cc: @James-Quigley @kcmartin

Reviewer 7: Yes, the correct explanation would be:

> One enhancement will be introduced in PodAffinity/PodAntiAffinity as alpha. It will increase the accuracy of calculation during rolling updates.
https://github.com/kubernetes/sig-release/discussions/2349#discussioncomment-7287657

### nftables backend for kube-proxy ([sig-network](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/tree/master/sig-network))
    

> The default kube-proxy implementation on Linux is currently based on iptables. IPTables was the preferred packet filtering and processing system in the Linux kernel for many years (starting with the 2.4 kernel in 2001). However, unsolvable problems with iptables led to the development of a successor, nftables. Development on iptables has mostly stopped, with new features and performance improvements primarily going into nftables instead.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The default kube-proxy implementation on Linux is currently based on iptables. Iptables was the preferred packet filtering and processing system in the Linux kernel for many years (starting with the 2.4 kernel in 2001). However, unsolvable problems with iptables led to the development of a successor, nftables. Development on iptables has mostly stopped, with new features and performance improvements primarily going into nftables instead.
```

Reviewer: Nope. It's iptables, all lowercase. We'd consider rephrasing to avoid the capitalization question at the start of a sentence, similar to what we do in the docs.

Reviewer: Eg:
> For many years, iptables was the preferred packet filtering and processing system in the Linux kernel (going back to with the 2.4 kernel released in 2001).

Author: > 

```suggestion
The default kube-proxy implementation on Linux is currently based on iptables. This was the preferred packet filtering and processing system in the Linux kernel for many years (starting with the 2.4 kernel in 2001). However, unsolvable problems with iptables led to the development of a successor, nftables. Development on iptables has mostly stopped, with new features and performance improvements primarily going into nftables instead.
```

This feature adds a new backend to kube-proxy based on nftables, since some Linux distributions already started to deprecate and remove iptables, and nftables claims to solve the main performance problems of iptables.
    

> ### An API to manage IP address ranges for Services ([sig-network](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/tree/master/sig-network))

Reviewer 8: From the design and code implementation of [KEP-1880](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/1880), this feature introduces not one but two apis.
> The proposal is to implement a new allocator logic that uses 2 new API Objects: ServiceCIDR and IPAddress, and allow users to dynamically increase the number of Services IPs available by creating new ServiceCIDRs.

Reviewer 2: Would this make more sense? Let me know, and I will commit the change. @mengjiao-liu @aojea 

`### Two APIs to manage IP address ranges for Services ([sig-network](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/tree/master/sig-network))

Services are an abstract way to expose an application running on a set of Pods. Services can have a cluster-scoped virtual IP address, that is allocated from a predefined CIDR defined in the `kube-apiserver` flags. However, users may want to add, remove or resize existing IP ranges allocated for Services without having to restart the `kube-apiserver`.

This feature implements a new allocator logic that uses 2 new API Objects: ServiceCIDR and IPAddress, and allows users to dynamically increase the number of Services IPs available by creating new ServiceCIDRs. This helps to resolve problems like IP exhaustion or IP renumbering.`

Reviewer 9: It reads great to me, one clarification, the IPAddress object is not really user facing in this case (it may be user facing in the future), as the user can only interact with the ServiceCIDR objects

Reviewer: So, an API client can't do a list or get on ipaddresses? (have I got that right?)

Reviewer 9: oh, it can, I meant, there is no functionality associated to the object for the users,

Reviewer 2: I've added a commit with the updated feature description, PTAL @aojea -- is any further clarification needed?

> Services are an abstract way to expose an application running on a set of Pods. Services can have a cluster-scoped virtual IP address, that is allocated from a predefined CIDR defined in the kube-apiserver flags. However, users may want to add, remove or resize existing IP ranges allocated for Services without having to restart the kube-apiserver.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Services are an abstract way to expose an application running on a set of Pods. Services can have a cluster-scoped virtual IP address that is allocated from a predefined CIDR defined in the kube-apiserver flags. However, users may want to add, remove, or resize existing IP ranges allocated for Services without having to restart the kube-apiserver.
```

This feature adds support to pull container images based on runtime class. This feature is off by default in v1.29 under a feature gate called `RuntimeClassInImageCriApi`.

Container images can either be a manifest or an index. When the image being pulled is an index (image index has a list of image manifests ordered by platform), platform matching logic is used to pull an appropriate image manifest from the index. By default, the platform matching logic picks a manifest that matches the host that the image pull is being executed from. This can be limiting for VM-based containers where a user could pull an image with the intention of running it as a VM-based container, for example, Windows Hyper-V containers.

The image pull per runtime class feature adds support to pull different images based the runtime class specified. This is achieved by referencing an image by a tuple of (`imageID`, `runtimeClass`), instead of just the `imageName` or `imageID`. Container runtimes could choose to add support for this feature if they'd like. If they do not, the default behavior of kubelet that existed prior to Kubernetes 1.29 will be retained.

> ### Implement In-place Update of Pod Resources ([sig-windows](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/tree/master/sig-windows))

Reviewer 5: Is someone working to add content here?

Author: > Is someone working to add content here?

cc: @James-Quigley @kcmartin

Reviewer 10: ```suggestion
### Implement In-place Update of Pod Resources ([sig-windows](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/tree/master/sig-windows))

This feature makes the Pod spec mutable with respect to `resources`, allowing users to define the _desired_ resource requests and limits for a Pod without the need to restart the Pod. With 1.29, this feature is now supported for Windows containers.
```

If you have previously been relying on in-tree cloud provider integrations (with Azure, GCE, or vSphere) then you can either:
- enable an equivalent external [cloud controller manager](/docs/concepts/architecture/cloud-controller/)
  integration _(recommended)_
- opt back in to the legacy integration by setting the associated feature gates to `false`; the feature
  gates to change are `DisableCloudProviders` and `DisableKubeletCloudCredentialProviders`
  
Enabling external cloud controller managers means you must run a suitable cloud controller manager within your cluster's control plane; it also requires setting the command line argument `--cloud-provider=external` for the kubelet (on every relevant node), and across the control plane (kube-apiserver and kube-controller-manager).

For more information about how to enable and run external cloud controller managers, read [Cloud Controller Manager Administration](/docs/tasks/administer-cluster/running-cloud-controller/) and [Migrate Replicated Control Plane To Use Cloud Controller Manager](/docs/tasks/administer-cluster/controller-manager-leader-migration/).

> 

Reviewer 11: we talked about this entry during the sig cloud provider meeting today and it was suggested that we add the links to the cloud controller managers here as well. could we add the follow:

```
If you need a cloud controller manager for one of the legacy in-tree providers, please see the following links:

* AWS - https://github.com/kubernetes/cloud-provider-aws 
* Azure - https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cloud-provider-azure
* GCE - https://github.com/kubernetes/cloud-provider-gcp
* OpenStack - https://github.com/kubernetes/cloud-provider-openstack
* vSphere - https://github.com/kubernetes/cloud-provider-vsphere 
```

> 

Author: ```suggestion

If you need a cloud controller manager for one of the legacy in-tree providers, please see the following links: 
* [Cloud provider AWS](https://github.com/kubernetes/cloud-provider-aws)
* [Cloud provider Azure](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cloud-provider-azure)
* [Cloud provider GCE](https://github.com/kubernetes/cloud-provider-gcp)
* [Cloud provider OpenStack](https://github.com/kubernetes/cloud-provider-openstack)
* [Cloud provider vSphere](https://github.com/kubernetes/cloud-provider-vsphere)
```

### Ecosystem Updates
- KubeDay India will take place in Bengaluru, India, on December 8, 2023. You can find more information about the conference and registration on the [event site](https://events.linuxfoundation.org/kubeday-india/).
- KubeDay Singapore will take place in Singapore, on December 12, 2023. You can find more information about the conference and registration on the [event site](https://events.linuxfoundation.org/kubeday-singapore/).
- KubeCon + CloudNativeCon Europe 2024 will take in Paris, France, from 19 – 22 MARCH 2024! You can find more information about the conference and registration on the [event site](https://events.linuxfoundation.org/kubecon-cloudnativecon-europe/).

### Upcoming Release Webinar

<RELEASE WEBINARE WILL TAKE PLACE NORMALLY 30 DAYS AFTER RELEASE, ALIGN WITH CNCF TO HIGHLIGHT THE WEBINAR>

> Join members of the Kubernetes 1.29 release team on <xxx> to learn about the major features of this release, as well as deprecations and removals to help plan for upgrades. For more information and registration, visit the event page on the CNCF Online Programs site.

Author: ```suggestion
Join members of the Kubernetes 1.29 release team on Friday, December 15th, 2023, at 9am PT to learn about the major features of this release, as well as deprecations and removals to help plan for upgrades. For more information and registration, visit the event page on the CNCF Online Programs site.
```
